3.0 whats new (#3960)
tarantool/doc: doc/release/3.0.0.rst

Reviewer: May use just 3.0 as a name? We don't create separate pages for minor releases anymore, so this page is also for all 3.0.x versions.

Tarantool 3.0
=============

Release date: December 26, 2023

Releases on GitHub: :tarantool-release:`3.0.0`

The 3.0 release of Tarantool introduces a new declarative approach for configuring a cluster,

> a visual tool for managing, configuring, and monitoring Tarantool EE clusters,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a new visual tool -- Tarantool Cluster Manager,
```

and many other new features and fixes.
This document provides an overview of the most important features for the Community and Enterprise editions.

-   :ref:`New declarative configuration <3-0-new_declarative_configuration>`
-   :ref:`Tarantool Cluster Manager <3-0-tarantool_cluster_manager>`
-   :ref:`Administration and maintenance <3-0-enhancements_for_administration_and_maintenance>`
-   :ref:`Developing applications <3-0-features_for_developers>`
-   :ref:`Stability <3-0-stability>`

.. _3-0-new_declarative_configuration:

New declarative configuration
-----------------------------

Starting with the 3.0 version, Tarantool provides the ability to :ref:`configure the full topology of a cluster <configuration>` using a declarative YAML configuration instead of configuring each instance using a dedicated Lua script.

> Using a new approach, you can use local configuration in a YAML file for each instance or store configuration data in one reliable place, for example, a Tarantool or an etcd cluster.

Reviewer: There are four words `use/using` in two sentences, better to rephrase
```suggestion
With a new approach, you can write a local configuration in a YAML file for each instance or store configuration data in one reliable place, for example, a Tarantool or an etcd cluster.
```

    :align: left
    :width: 700
    :alt: Cluster topology

The example below demonstrates how a topology of such a cluster might look in a YAML configuration file:

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster/config.yaml
    :start-at: groups:
    :language: yaml
    :dedent:

You can find the full sample in the GitHub documentation repository: `sharded_cluster <https://github.com/tarantool/doc/tree/latest/doc/code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster>`_.

The latest version of the tt utility provides the ability to :ref:`manage Tarantool instances <admin-start_stop_instance>` configured using a new approach.
You can start all instances in a cluster by executing one command, check the status of instances, or stop them:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tt start sharded_cluster
       • Starting an instance [sharded_cluster:storage-a-001]...
       • Starting an instance [sharded_cluster:storage-a-002]...
       • Starting an instance [sharded_cluster:storage-b-001]...
       • Starting an instance [sharded_cluster:storage-b-002]...
       • Starting an instance [sharded_cluster:router-a-001]...

> 

Reviewer: I find "Learn more in <>" sentences in the end of what's new sections more helpful than just links under some words in descriptions. Anyway this is minor, up to you.

Author: I'd keep this as is because `Learn more` phrases distract a user from scanning a what's new. But this definitely works better for regular topics.

.. code-block:: none

    http://localhost:2379/example/config/*

.. _3-0-tarantool_cluster_manager:

Tarantool Cluster Manager (EE)
------------------------------

Tarantool 3.0 Enterprise Edition comes with a brand new visual tool – :ref:`Tarantool Cluster Manager <tcm>` (TCM).
It provides a web-based user interface for managing, configuring, and monitoring Tarantool EE clusters that use centralized configuration storage.

[TODO: stateboard image]

TCM can manage multiple clusters and covers a wide range of tasks, from writing a cluster’s configuration to executing commands interactively on specific instances.

[TODO: config image]

TCM's role-based access control system lets you manage users’ access to clusters, their configurations, and stored data.

[TODO: users image]

The built-in customizable audit logging mechanism and LDAP authentication make TCM a suitable solution for different enterprise security requirements.

[TODO: audit log image]

.. _3-0-enhancements_for_administration_and_maintenance:

Administration and maintenance
------------------------------

.. _3-0-database_statistics:

Database statistics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Starting with 3.0, Tarantool provides extended statistics about memory consumption for the given space or even specific tuples.

Reviewer: This is a long document, so I prefer avoiding needless words.

```suggestion
Starting with 3.0, Tarantool provides extended statistics about memory consumption for the given space or specific tuples.
```

    ---
    - data_size: 277
      waste_size: 9
      arena: memtx
      field_map_size: 0
      header_size: 10
    ...

.. _3-0-bootstrapping_a_replica_set:

Bootstrapping a replica set
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new version includes the capability to choose a bootstrap leader for a replica set manually.
The bootstrap leader is a node that creates an initial snapshot and registers all the replicas in a replica set.

First, you need to set :ref:`replication.bootstrap_strategy <configuration_reference_replication_bootstrap_strategy>` to ``config``.
Then, use the ``<replicaset_name>.bootstrap_leader`` option to specify a bootstrap leader.

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/replication/instances.enabled/bootstrap_strategy/config.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :start-at: groups:
    :end-at: 127.0.0.1:3303
    :dedent:

..  NOTE::

    Note that in 3.0, the :ref:`replication_connect_quorum <cfg_replication-replication_connect_quorum>` option is removed.
    This option was used to specify the number of nodes to be up and running for starting a replica set.

.. _3-0-security:

Security (EE)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> With the 3.0 version, Tarantool Enterprise Edition provides a set of new features that enhance :ref:`security <enterprise-security>` in your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the 3.0 version, Tarantool Enterprise Edition provides a set of new features that enhance :ref:`security <enterprise-security>` in your cluster:
```

-   Added the ``auth_retries`` option that configures the maximum number of authentication retries before throttling is enabled.
    You can configure this option as follows:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        security:
          auth_retries: 3

-   Added the capability to use the new SSL certificate with the same name by reloading the configuration.
    To do this, use the ``reload()`` function provided by the new ``config`` module:

    .. code-block:: console

        app:instance001> require('config'):reload()
        ---
        ...

.. _3-0-audit_logging:

Audit logging (EE)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tarantool Enterprise Edition includes the following new features for :ref:`audit logging <enterprise_audit_module>`:

-   Added a unique identifier (UUID) to each audit log entry.
-   Introduced audit log severity levels.
    Each system audit event now has a severity level determined by its importance.
-   Added the ``audit_log.audit_spaces`` option that configures the list of spaces for which data operation events should be logged.
-   Added the ``audit_log.audit_extract_key`` option that forces the audit subsystem to log the primary key instead of a full tuple in DML operations.

>     This might be useful for reducing an audit log's size in the case of large tuples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This might be useful for reducing audit log size in the case of large tuples.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    flightrec:
      enabled: true

Then, you can use the Lua API to open and read ``*.ttfr`` files:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    app:instance001> flightrec = require('flightrec')
    ---
    ...

    app:instance001> flightrec_file = flightrec.open('var/lib/instance001/20231225T085435.ttfr')
    ---
    ...

    app:instance001> flightrec_file
    ---
    - sections: &0
        requests:
          size: 10485760
        metrics:
          size: 368640
        logs:
          size: 10485760
      was_closed: false
      version: 0
      pid: 1350
    ...

    app:instance001> for i, r in flightrec_file.sections.logs:pairs() do record = r; break end
    ---
    ...

    app:instance001> record
    ---
    - level: INFO
      fiber_name: interactive
      fiber_id: 103
      cord_name: main
      file: ./src/box/flightrec.c
      time: 2023-12-25 08:50:12.275
      message: 'Flight recorder: configuration has been done'
      line: 727
    ...

    app:instance001> flightrec_file:close()
    ---
    ...

.. _3-0-deb_rpm_package:

New DEB and RPM packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> With this release, the approach to delivering Tarantool to end users using DEB and RPM packages is slightly revised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, the approach to delivering Tarantool to end users in DEB and RPM packages is slightly revised.
```

In the previous versions, Tarantool was built for the most popular Linux distributions and their latest version.

Starting with this release, only two sets of DEB and RPM packages are delivered.
The difference is that these packages include a statically compiled Tarantool binary.
This approach provides the ability to install DEB and RPM packages on any Linux distributions that are based on СentOS and Debian.

To ensure that Tarantool works for a wide range of different distributions and their versions, RPM and DEB packages are prepared on CentOS 7 with glibc 2.17.

.. _3-0-features_for_developers:

Developing applications
-----------------------

.. _3-0-varbinary_data_type:

varbinary in Lua
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In the previous versions, Tarantool already supported a ``varbinary`` type for :ref:`storing data <index_box_field_type_details>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous versions, Tarantool already supported the ``varbinary`` type for :ref:`storing data <index_box_field_type_details>`.
```

> But working with ``varbinary`` database fields required using various workarounds, for example, using C to process such data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But working with ``varbinary`` database fields required workarounds, such as using C to process such data.
```

    })

.. _3-0-triggers:

Triggers
~~~~~~~~

In the 3.0 version, the API for creating :ref:`triggers <triggers>` is completely reworked.
A new ``trigger`` module is introduced, allowing you to set handlers on both predefined and custom events.

To create the trigger, you need to:

1)  Provide an event name used to associate the trigger with.
2)  Define the trigger name.
3)  Provide a trigger handler function.

The code snippet below shows how to subscribe to changes in the ``books`` space:

.. code-block:: lua

    local trigger = require('trigger')
    trigger.set(
            'box.space.books.on_replace', -- event name
            'some-custom-trigger',        -- trigger name
            function(...)
                -- trigger handler
            end
    )

.. _3-0-pagination_for_read_views:

Pagination in read views (EE)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 2.11 release introduced the following features:

-   :ref:`Read views <2-11-read_views>` are in-memory snapshots of the entire database that aren't affected by future data modifications.
-   :ref:`Pagination <2-11-pagination>` for getting data in chunks.

> With this release, a read view object supports the ``after`` and ``fetch_pos`` arguments for the ``select`` and ``pairs`` methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the 3.0 release, a read view object supports the ``after`` and ``fetch_pos`` arguments for the ``select`` and ``pairs`` methods:
```

.. code-block:: tarantoolsession

    -- Select first 3 tuples and fetch a last tuple's position --
    app:instance001> result, position = read_view1.space.bands:select({}, { limit = 3, fetch_pos = true })
    ---
    ...

    app:instance001> result
    ---
    - - [1, 'Roxette', 1986]
      - [2, 'Scorpions', 1965]
      - [3, 'Ace of Base', 1987]
    ...

    app:instance001> position
    ---
    - kQM
    ...

    -- Then, you can pass this position as the 'after' parameter --
    app:instance001> read_view1.space.bands:select({}, { limit = 3, after = position })
    ---
    - - [4, 'The Beatles', 1960]
      - [5, 'Pink Floyd', 1965]
      - [6, 'The Rolling Stones', 1962]
    ...

.. _3-0-iproto_tuples:

IPROTO tuple format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Starting with the 3.0 version, the IPROTO protocol is extended to support for sending names of tuple fields in the :ref:`IPROTO_CALL <box_protocol-call>` and other IPROTO responses.

Reviewer: "protocol is extended to support for" sounds too complex. Perhaps there is a simpler wording for this.
